Physical inactivity has been identified as the fourth leading risk factor for 
global mortality (6% of deaths globally). This follows high blood pressure 
(13%), tobacco use (9%) and high blood glucose (6%). Overweight and 
obesity are responsible for 5% of global mortality (1). 
Levels of physical inactivity are rising in many countries with major 
implications for the general health of people worldwide and for the 
prevalence of NCDs such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes and cancer 
and their risk factors such as raised blood pressure, raised blood sugar 
and overweight. Physical inactivity is estimated as being the principal 
cause for approximately 21–25% of breast and colon cancer burden, 27% 
of diabetes and approximately 30% of ischaemic heart disease burden 
(1). In addition, NCDs now account for nearly half of the overall global 
burden of disease. It is estimated currently that of every 10 deaths, 6 are 
attributable to noncommunicable conditions (2). 
Global health is being influenced by three trends: population-ageing, rapid 
unplanned urbanization, and globalization, all of which result in unhealthy 
environments and behaviours. As a result, the growing prevalence of NCDs 
and their risk factors has become a global issue affecting both low- and 
middle-income countries. Nearly 45% of the adult disease burden in these 
countries is now attributable to NCDs. Many low- and middle-income 
countries are beginning to suffer the double burden of communicable and 
noncommunicable diseases, and health systems in these countries are now 
having to cope with the additional costs of treating both.
It has been shown that participation in regular physical activity reduces 
the risk of coronary heart disease and stroke, diabetes, hypertension, 
colon cancer, breast cancer and depression. Additionally, physical activity 
is a key determinant of energy expenditure, and thus is fundamental to 
energy balance and weight control (1–6).
In May 2004, the Fifty-seventh World Health Assembly endorsed 
Resolution WHA57.17: Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and 
Health and recommended that Member States develop national physical 
activity action plans and policies to increase physical activity levels in 
their populations (5). Furthermore, in May 2008, the Sixty-first World 
Health Assembly endorsed Resolution WHA61.14: Prevention and Control 
of Noncommunicable Diseases: Implementation of the Global Strategy and 
the Action Plan for the Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control of 
Noncommunicable Diseases (7). 
This Action Plan urges Member States to implement national guidelines 
on physical activity for health and encourages them to develop and put 
into practice policies and interventions that:
• develop and implement national guidelines on physical activity for 
health; 
• introduce transport policies that promote active and safe methods 
of travelling to and from schools and workplaces, such as walking or 
cycling; 
• ensure that physical environments support safe active commuting, 
and create space for recreational activity.
The action plan urges WHO to provide countries with technical support in 
either implementing or strengthening nationwide actions to reduce risk 
factors for NCDs.
2.1 
PUBLIc HEALTH 
SIgNIFIcANcE OF 
PHySIcAL AcTIVITy
2.2
mANdATE ON PHySIcAL 
AcTIVITy FOR HEALTHGlobal Recommendations on Physical Activity for Health
11
The limited existence of national guidelines on physical activity for health 
in low- and middle-income countries, the public health significance of 
physical activity and the global mandates for the work of WHO, related 
to promotion of physical activity and NCD prevention, make evident the 
need for the development of global recommendations that address the 
links between the frequency, duration, intensity, type and total amount of 
physical activity needed for the prevention of NCDs. 
Scientifically-informed recommendations, with a global scope, on the 
benefits, type, amount, frequency, intensity, duration and total amount 
of the physical activity necessary for health benefits are key information 
for policy-makers wanting to address physical activity at population level 
and who are involved in the development of guidelines and policies at 
regional and national levels on prevention and control of NCDs. 
The development and publication of science-based national or regional 
physical activity guidelines can: 
• inform national physical activity policies and other public health 
interventions;
• provide the starting point to the establishment of goals and objectives 
for physical activity promotion at national level;
• foster intersectoral collaboration and contribute to setting up national 
goals and objectives regarding physical activity promotion; 
• provide a foundation for physical activity promotion initiatives;
• justify the allocation of resources to physical activity promotion 
interventions;
• create a framework for joint action for all other relevant stakeholders 
around the same goal; 
• provide an evidence-based document that enables all relevant 
stakeholders to transfer policy into action with the allocation of the 
appropriate resources; and
• facilitate national surveillance and monitoring mechanisms to monitor 
population levels of physical activity.
